# High Availability, Load Balancing, Autoscaling and Cloud Bursting

_High Availability, load balancing, autoscaling and cloud bursting: general mechanisms and solutions_

## High Availability

High availability is maximizing uptime and continuous operation. This can be guaranteed by an SLA (Service Level Agreement). An important concept is fault tolerance, which eliminates interruption in case of the failure of one or more components. An example to this would be deploying an application in multiple regions simultaneously enabling failover. The biggest con high availability comes with is increased costs due to redundancy.

## Autoscaling

### Types of Scaling

There are two types of scaling:
* Vertical scalability - increasing the compute power of the server. Vertical scaling has hardware limitation. Increasing the compute power is called scaling up while decreasing is called scaling down.
* Horizontal scalability (elasticity) - increasing the number of servers. It works the best for distributed systems. High availability can be ensured by horizontal scaling. Increasing the number of instances is called scaling out while decreasing them is called scaling in.

An autoscaling group handles the horizontal scaling of the instances based on some measurement (e.g. CPU utilization).

## Load Balancing

Load balancers forward traffic to multiple EC2 instances. The goal is to spread the load across multiple instances, while providing a single point of external access. The load balancer checks the health of the instances, to ensure that they are operational and only forwards traffic to healthy instances. Load balancers also have TLS termination, meaning that it accepts HTTPS traffic and forwards it as HTTP on the internal network. Load balancers support stickiness (forwarding traffic from the same source to the same target instance) enabling a stateful connection. Load balancers support multiple availability zones, ensuring high availability.

### Types of Load Balancers

* Classic Load Balancer (v1 2009) - deprecated, works at lower levels.
* Application Load Balancer (v2 2016) - works at the application layer, it can redirect traffic based on path. By default, the instances see the load balancer's IP as the source, but they can get the client's IP from the `X-FORWARDED-FOR` HTTP header.
* Network Load Balancer (v2 2017) - it works at the network layer, ideal for high throughput traffic.
