# NoSQL Basics

Comparison:

|               | **SQL**                | **NoSQL**         |
|---------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| **Type**      | Relational             | Non-relational    |
| **Scaling**   | Vertically             | Horizontally      |
| **Structure** | Table-based            | Document-based    |
| **Querying**  | SQL                    | Dynamic           |
| **Ideal for** | Multi-row transactions | Unstructured JSON |

## HBase/Hive

Both technologies are developed by Apache and are part of the Hadoop ecosystem.

### HBase

Apache Hbase is a distributed database management system. It is used both for transaction processing (tasks with a time-constraint) and analytical processing. It provides random access (immediate accesses to specific data) and low latency. It is built on top of HDFS. It uses a column oriented data storage model.

### Hive

Hive works on top of Hadoop as a data warehouse. It is only used for analytical processing. due to its high latency. It provides a SQL interface and makes use of both HDFS and MapReduce. Its data model is similar to relational databases (fixed schema).

## Sharding

Splitting a large database into smaller pieces called shards. It allows the storage of more data and provides performance improvement. With the help of replication it also provides high availability and fault-tolerance.


### Structure

The logical shards are stored on the nodes (also known as physical shard). One physical shard may contain multiple logical shards. A shard key is selected to decide how to partition a dataset.

The physical shards are unaware of each other and work independently in parallel. The software layer above manages the shards. Some databases have built-in sharding functionality.

### Types of Sharding

* Range-based sharding - it splits rows based on a range of values. Example: you select name as they key then split them based on the first character in the name Shard 1 > A-K, Shard 2 L-Z. Easy to implement, however it may result in overloading one of the shards, in the previous example the first shard would contain significantly more data due to the number of names starting with A-K compared to L-Z.
* Hashed sharding - a hash function is applied to each row in the database then distributes the rows based on the hash value. It provides even distribution, however the data is not grouped logically.
* Directory sharding - it makes use of a lookup table which maps the value to the appropriate shard. The biggest downside is the single point of failure it creates with the lookup table.
* Geo sharding - sharding based on physical location. The biggest advantage of this approach is the ability to serve data closest to the user's geolocation.

### CAP Theorem

This concepts explains the tradeoffs between consistency and availability in case of a network partition. In this scenario, the system needs to prioritize either consistency or availability.

Architects need to decide what their platforms must prioritize. As an example, a bank must prioritize consistency (to avoid double spending and other issues). A social media platform could prioritize availability, since inconsistent data would not have such severe consequences.

It is worth noting that the theorem is not entirely accurate in the sense that in real world the trade-off may not be so black and white, e.g. some level of consistency may be lost in exchange for availability or the other way around but not entirely.