# NoSQL Basics II

_NoSQL basics II: Document, graph and column-oriented databases (sharding options)_

## Columnar Database

Relational databases read data from left to right, proceeding from row to row. For large amounts of data this approach can be slow. Columnar databases can read only the necessary columns from top to bottom, which makes them more efficient if we only need data from certain columns.

A good example of a columnar database is Apache Cassandra.

### Sharding

Shards can be selected based on:

* Primary key
* Composite key
* A part of the composite key (which is called the partitioning key in this case)


## Document Database

Document database is a type of database used for storing and querying data in JSON-like documents. Since they are schemaless, the inserted documents can freely change their structure.

These JSON-like documents allow:
* Key-value pairs
* Arrays
* Objects (a collection of key-value pairs)

It allows unlimited level hierarchy, and it has a flexible schema. The most well-known document database is MongoDB.

### Structure

Each document has a unique identifier that serves as the key. A query language can be used to read document data, specific fields can be targeted using their keys. Existing documents can be updated entirely or only the necessary fields.

### Advantages

* Ease of development - JSON is easy to deal with, no need to create a rigorous schema
* Flexible schema - fields can change depending on the documents (although a schema can be enforced through validation)
* Performance at scale - ability to scale horizontally

## Graph Database

A graph database connects data nodes to build a relationship between them. Graph databases have their own special query language. It is used for analysis, to find even distant connections. A well-known open-source graph database is ArangoDB.