# WAN

_WAN services, taxonomy, types and characteristics_

A wide area network (WAN) connects different networks together over different locations.

## Network Types

* PAN (Personal Area Network) - a network used on a personal level. Examples include bluetooth, infrared, NFC or USB.
* LAN (Local Area Network) - a group of devices located in the same building forming a network. The most common type of LAN is an Ethernet LAN (devices connected via Ethernet).
* WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) - a LAN that uses wireless communication.
* CAN (Campus Area Network) - a network connecting two or more LANs within a limited area. E.g. university campuses connected.
* MAN (Metropolitan Area Network) - a network that spans over several buildings in a city.
* SAN (Storage Area Network) - a high-speed network that allows access to large amounts of data.
* WAN - a network that spans over a large geographical area. The most well-known example is the internet.

## Topologies

* Point-to-point - connects point A to point B.
* Hub and spoke - one central site (hub) and multiple remote sites (spokes). The biggest disadvantage of this topology is the single point of failure posed by the central site.
* Full mesh - each site is connected to every other site. Very resilient, if one site goes down the others can still communicate. The biggest drawback of this topology is cost.
* Dual-home (or partial mesh) - an example to this would be two central sites (a main and a backup) and multiple remotes that are connected to both central sites.