# Network Attacks

## Network Attacks by Layers

## Layer 1: Physical

Wireless attacks include:
* Jamming - a stronger transmitter overrides a weaker one.
* Spoofing - a malicious transmitter tricks the receiver into thinking that is the legitimate transmitter.
* Interception
* Electromagnetic interference (EMI)

### Countermeasures

Physically hardening systems and securely locking away the infrastructure with access control.

## Layer 2: Link

* DHCP starvation - forging requests to request new IPs until the DHCP pool is exhausted.
* DHCP spoof attack - an untrusted client spreading DHCP messages through the network.
* MAC address related attacks
* VLAN attacks
* ARP attacks
* DoS attacks
* SSID spoofing

### Countermeasures

* Correct configuration
* IDS and IPS
* Honeypots (to detect attackers)
* Whitelisting and blacklisting
* Monitoring the network
* Using SSH for inbound connections over other insecure protocols

## Layer 3: Network

* ICMP attacks (smurf attack) - DDoS through ICMP packets. By spoofing the target IPs and sending broadcast messages in the network, the target will be overwhelmed by the responses of the network devices.
* Routing RIP attacks - false RIP responses to redirect the traffic to the attacker.
* Ping flood - overwhelming the target with pings.
* IP spoofing - impersonating an IP address by manipulating IP packet headers.
* Ping of death - ICMP datagrams that exceed the maximum size.
* Teardrop attacks - manipulates the offset field in the IP header, potentially causing overflow and system crash.
* Packet sniffing reconnaissance - gaining intelligence about potential exploits through packet sniffing.

### Countermeasures

* Implementing IPsec
* Securing ICMP
* ACL protection against address spoofing
* Packet filtering

## Layer 4: Transport

* Injection attacks - guessing the next packet sequence number or forcing a reset of packet numbers so that the attackers can insert their own packets.
* SYN floods - overwhelming the network by initiating TCP connections.
* TLS attacks - attacks targeting TLS.
* TCP port scans and other reconnaissance

### Countermeasures

* DoS prevention services
* Whitelisting and blacklisting IPs
* Appropriate use of TLS
* Traffic monitoring and analysis
* TCP filtering

## Layer 5: Session

* Man in the middle attacks - the attacker inserts themselves into the link between two parties (they can sniff or alter packets).
* DNS poisoning - altering the target's DNS resolver cache to redirect to malicious sites.
* Blind hijacking - when the attacker can execute commands remotely without being able to see their result.
* Session hijacking - harvesting session keys from the victims and abusing them.

### Countermeasures

* Strong passwords
* PKI for identity management
* Implementing more robust IDS and IPS

## Layer 6: Presentation

* Vulnerabilities in encryption, key management and decryption

### Countermeasures

Replacing insecure protocols (e.g. FTP) with their secure alternatives (e.g. SFTP).

## Layer 7: Application

* Cross site scripting (XSS) - inserting malicious code on trusted websites.
* Remote Code Execution (RCE) - the attacker remotely executes commands on the victim's device.
* SQL injection - executing malicious code in the database by exploiting vulnerabilities.
* Cross site request forgery - the websites attempts to make malicious requests to other sites.
* Format string vulnerabilities - arbitrary code execution exploiting text formatting vulnerabilities.
* HTTP flood - overwhelming the server with HTTP requests.
* HTTP server resource pool exhaustion - attempting to exhaust the server's resources by opening up as many connections as possible.
* Reconnaissance attacks such as username enumeration (guessing what legitimate usernames on a system).

### Countermeasures

* Blocking known malicious bots
* Securing cookies
* Monitoring user activity
* Using MFA
* Using application level IDS and IPS

## Common Attack Types

### Phishing

Fraudulent emails and messages that impersonate trusted entities to trick users into sharing sensitive information or downloading malware.

### Denial of Service

DoS attacks overwhelm the resources by flooding networks with traffic disrupting services.

### Man in the Middle

MITM attacks intercept and manipulate communication between parties (e.g. eavesdropping, altering data exchanges).

### SQL Injection

Inserts malicious SQL commands by exploiting improperly sanitized SQL input.

### Malware

Malware refers to malicious software.

### XSS

Cross-site scripting inserts malicious scripts on a website. It may be used for redirecting the user or session hijacking.

### APT

Advanced persistent threats are targeted cyber-attacks by skilled adversaries.

### Social Engineer

Social engineering plays on human psychology through techniques like appeal to authority to gain access to confidential information typically through impersonation.

### Insider Threat

Insiders of an organization pose potential threat as they can abuse their privileges.

### Password Attacks

Cracking password through brute-force or dictionary (rainbow table) attacks.

### Drive-by Downloads

Compromised websites may automatically install malware on the user's devices without user interaction exploiting vulnerabilities in web browsers.

### Botnets

A network of compromised devices to execute coordinated attacks (e.g. DDoS).

### Cryptojacking

Covertly uses the victim's compute resources to mine cryptocurrencies (a malware that runs cryptocurrency mining software in the background).

### DNS Spoofing

Manipulates DNS servers or caches to redirect users to a malicious website.

### Keylogging

Keystrokes are recorded on compromised devices to steal sensitive information such as passwords.

### IoT Exploitation

Targets vulnerabilities in IoT devices, to gain unauthorized access and potentially launch attacks against other devices in the network.

### Eavesdropping

Intercepts data transmission to capture sensitive information.

### Zero-day Exploit

Makes use of newly discovered vulnerabilities (that the developers are unaware of).

### Spyware

Covertly collects information about user activity.
