# Cryptographic Tools

_The different cryptographic tools serving authentication, integrity and confidentiality_

## CIA

CIA stands for confidentiality, integrity and availability. It is a triad used as a basis for developing security systems.

### Confidentiality

Confidentiality can be achieved through:
* Access control - authentication and authorization.
* Encryption - only authorized parties can read the message, unauthorized parties would not be able to read it.

### Integrity

Integrity ensures that the message was not tampered with.

It can be achieved through:
* Digital signatures
* Message authentication codes

### Availability

Ensuring availability consists mainly of defending against denial-of-service attacks.

## Encryption

Definitions:
* Confidentiality - only the intended recipient can interpret the data.
* Plain text - data before encryption.
* Cyphertext - data after encryption.

Simple encryption always applies the same transformation. The issue with that is whoever knows the algorithm, can interpret any message that uses the same transformation, even if it was not intended for them. A solution to this would be using a different algorithm, however this does not scale.

A better approach is key based encryption which combines a well-established algorithm with a secret key, that can be randomly generated.

### Symmetric Encryption

Encryption and decryption happens with the same keys.

Examples:
* AES
* ChaCha20 

The common key can be shared using Diffie-Hellman key exchange.

#### Diffie-Hellman

Suppose Alice and Bob wants to communicate securely. In the public space, there is **g** (a generator) that can be used for creating keys. Alice adds her own secret **a** forming **g<sup>a</sup>**, while Bob also adds his own secret **b** forming **g<sup>b</sup>**. Alice and Bob exchange these newly created keys. Then they both add their own secret again, forming **g<sup>ab</sup>** on both sides. Since now both sides have the same key, they can communicate securely. Throughout this process the final key **g<sup>ab</sup>** was never revealed to the public and it cannot be obtained without knowing the secrets **a** or **b**.

#### MAC

Message authentication code is the idea of combining a message with a secret key before hashing in order to detect alteration of the message and its digest. This way, only users that have the secret key can create an acceptable digest (preventing third parties from altering the message). The result of the hashed key and message is called message authentication code.

#### HMAC

Hash-based message authentication code addresses the issue of how the message and the key are combined before hashing. This is to ensure that the sender and the receiver combines the message and the key the same way.

### Asymmetric Encryption

Encryption and decryption happens with the different keys. It involves a key-pair called private and public keys. They are mathematically related, if encryption is done by the public key, it can be decrypted by the private key and vice versa.

Examples:
* RSA
* ECDSA

### Comparison

Asymmetric encryption:
* Slower – requires larger key sizes.
* Private key is never shared – more secure.
* Cipher text expansion.

Symmetric encryption:
* Faster – lower CPU cost.
* Secret key must be shared – less secure.
* Cipher text is same size as plain text.
