# Securing Local Area Networks

_Securing Local Area Networks: The types and operations of the L2 attacks and the possibility of the defense_

## DHCP Starvation

A flood of fake DHCP discover messages are sent with spoofed MAC addresses. The server sends out offers as a response waiting for the clients to accept that, which of course will not happen. This way, the DHCP pool can be exhausted. This attack may also attempt to set up a rogue DHCP server on the network which can assign IP addresses, the attacker's default gateway and DNS server to the devices.

### Mitigation

DHCP snooping can be implemented which will block rogue DHCP servers. The MAC address within the DHCP packet can be compared with the source MAC address to ensure it is not masqueraded.

## STP Attacks

The goal in this attack is to assume the role of the root bridge in the network. This way, the attacker can sniff or even block the traffic.

### Mitigation

Enabling root guard on all ports where a root bridge is not expected.

## VLAN Hopping

Breaking out of one VLAN to another without routing. It can be achieved by MAC flooding so that the switches MAC table gets so that the switch falls back to hub mode, which means every message is broadcast.

Another method is that the attacker configures their NIC as a trunk port (encourages the switch to negotiate a trunk link). This way, all VLAN will become accessible.

Double-tagging is another method, where the outside tag is the attacker's VLAN while the inside is the VLAN they target. The switch will remove the outer VLAN tag then forward the traffic based on the second VLAN tag attached by the attacker.

### Mitigation

Keeping the switch up to date, shutting down any unused ports and assigning them to an unused VLAN. Other options include changing the port mode to access or disabling DTP.